The rise of big data in modern research poses serious challenges for
data management: Large and intricate datasets from diverse
instrumentation must be precisely aligned, annotated, and organized in
a flexible way that allows swift exploration and analysis. Data
management should guarantee consistency of intermediate results in
subsequent multi-step processing pipelines such that changes in one
part automatically propagate to all downstream results. Finally, data
organization should be self-documenting to ensure that lab members and
collaborators can access the data with minimal effort, even years
after it was collected. While high levels of data integrity are
expected, research teams have diverse backgrounds, are geographically
dispersed, and rarely possess a primary interest in data science.
Here we describe DataJoint, an open-source toolbox designed for
organizing and processing scientific data under the relational data
model.  Designed for scientists who need a flexible and expressive
database language with few basic concepts and operations, DataJoint
facilitates multi-user access, efficient queries, and distributed
computing.  With implementations in both MATLAB and Python, DataJoint
is not limited to particular file formats, acquisition systems, or
data modalities and can be quickly adapted to new experimental
designs.  DataJoint and related resources are available at
\url{http://datajoint.github.com}.
